listen when they see us is a work of art
I know Chernobyl one and I'm happy for
it but Ava Duvernay had one of the best
MIDI series of all time it's only four
episodes each one ends on a mic job and
it's based on a real story that
absolutely everyone should know let me
explain
entertainment there's all kinds of
different purposes I love horror I love
romance I love action but to be able to
create something with my collaborators
that is actually going to move people to
action move people to evaluate what they
think and how they behave in the world
what's our goal so the series is
produced by Robert DeNiro and Oprah
Winfrey it was the highest viewed on
Netflix upon its release and overall
hundred and ninety countries which as
we've quoted Ava in the past theaters
may not be replaceable but when you're
showing movies about places that don't
even have theaters in the places that
they're about you realize that the reach
streaming has is crucial and so each
episode sets out to break down the
justice system and how easily it can be
manipulated
[Music]
the story revolves around five boys
Kevin and Ron Yusef Raymond and Corey
who were wrongfully convicted of an
incident that happened in Central Park
on April 19th 1989 mainly because this
lady Linda didn't listen you said on
your report here they were Wilding
what's that mean yon are goes you don't
know what something means assume the
worst out Wilding time even Jamal was
like get off my block lady thing is when
you really pay attention to how these
cops were hyping up this incidents they
just keep repeating how late it was
at 9:30 they're terrorizing folks here
at 10:00 one of them is raping the
female jogger here what happened in the
half-hour in between what did these
animals do and like to pretend that
10:00 p.m. is super late went back in
the day Johnny Carson himself didn't go
on till 11:00
yeah it's just optics it's like calling
a 29 year old Olympian a boy
well Trayvon was a man at 16 is there
enough time for all this to even happen
well it happened so obviously there was
they now have this roomful of kids who
they did keep up really late and then
when they heard that a brutal rape had
happened in the park they then created
the story they wanted this lady
literally commands that they raid the
projects they manipulate statistics for
their advantage interrogate them for
over 40 hours and use emotion to lay
blame on whoever they can corral because
when you have that much power you're
practically in charge of deeming what's
right and what's wrong and you skew
evidence to fit your story
it's some targaryen level of delusion
the police what would they want they
would do anything now detective of mind
would ever say anything like that
the words are their words we don't put
words in people's mouths
oh we're no just altered DNA then their
DNA isn't there it's not any
so there must have been another attacker
these cops start lying about things
these kids weren't a part of which
that's something that's always blown my
mind using that tactic of lying in order
to get the truth coming from law
enforcement I know what I was I know
what I was asked to do and I did it
hi buddy I need a friendly neighborhood
police officer did you like a glass of
water yeah yeah too bad they're abusing
minors and interrogating them for hours
without their parents forcing them to
sign away their Miranda rights it was
less about building a time line to see
who did it but filling in the blanks for
the story they had already created and
then they blackmail the parents that's a
good job yeah it is supervised you know
about your past Bobby and if the parents
weren't in the picture your mother left
voluntarily it suddenly feels like
Christmas a reminder that all for
coerced confessions are out on YouTube
and you can watch the entirety of them
it has the interrogators filling in the
gaps and all the blanks for them after
all the contradictions after the 40
hours of keeping them up and it would be
Vlad who has all these tapes this is
where I highly recommend this video
right here that I believe everyone
should watch this about pleading the
fifth not because you're hiding
something but because you're not going
to be giving fragmented pieces that can
be used against you and this is coming
from a white criminal defense lawyer
from Harvard because if a cop can take
ten days to get their story straight
then you're allowed legal counsel if not
then you'll be accused of committing a
crime you know nothing about and meet
your accomplices for the first time in a
jail cell
how about are you too
[Music]
[Applause]
episode two breaks down the court system
bail and the media and bill is stoopid
krazy literally if you have enough money
you can get away with crime but if
you're poor yeah you're screwed this
whole idea that we really have a debtors
prison in this country you can you can
pay to get out or you can be poor and
stay in and that's really who these
criminals are people who just couldn't
pay so think big corporate bails hot all
the time you post one link for a bail
fund for protesters and all of a sudden
you're an anarchist now not to mention
they play more games in court than the
NBA
two maybe three we just have to find the
right combination of defendants that
requires the least amount of editing of
the tapes and one that Phil if they were
present if they did nothing to stop her
agony and they were guilty Netflix has a
whole series called trial by media that
I highly recommend it talks about how
the news and public perception clearly
affect the case like some people still
hear this story and think they were
guilty a lot of stupidest comment on
Facebook which I know that's on me
but imagine defending the Duke lacrosse
team and demanding their ear as these
five men because [ __ ] didn't know they
got the real due to know to help this
person thought that perhaps he can was
Netflix marketing and that they had
something on them like don't you know
they have a deal with New Coke
[Music]
to some people it isn't even about
evidence to them it's unfathomable for
the story to be any other way than what
they've already concocted in their mind
because of what they saw on TV what they
hear on the news when your interactions
are limited with a certain demographic
or you're a cop who only deals with the
negative then that image has been
painted and worse they breed stop acting
like a black eye like a normal person
and then we won't judge you by your
color I've said one occasion even about
myself if I was starting off today I
would love to be a well educated but
because I really believe they do have an
actual advantage today you better
believe that I hate the people that took
this girl and raped her brutally you
better believe it
this man took out an $85,000 ad wishing
that death penalties on these boys and
even after they were proven innocent
this man wrote an op-ed and said nah
hopefully George is looking down right
now and saying this is a great thing
that's happening for our country there's
a great day for him it's a great day for
everybody
boy can't even tell when something's
been edited like a much dank video ain't
this mr. fake news but you know what
screw the Daily News - they're the ones
who ran the ads and then have the
audacity to years later write an article
after the Netflix series is out trying
to call out Trump to take responsibility
like didn't y'all take the money this is
all before their trial you know weeks
after the news broke and so this this
this film asks you to think about the
news you know at that time 89% of that
of the headlines and the articles
written about this case didn't use the
word alleged episode two begins with the
media manipulation the story just so
everyone can revel in fear and you know
how they profit off misery all the way
up to this day they rework their spam to
be information which if it's not behind
a paywall they'll hit you with 80 ads
they'll say Moke media outlets that
claim to be on your side will be the
first to turn on you hell it was a New
York Times who pegged a moniker of the
central part 5 stripping them of their
individuality so it was easier for the
public to condemn them and the title was
was a big part of it's the first time
you meet the movie is when it walks up
to you and says hi my name
Kevin right opposite three flashes
forward to those who have been released
how'd you hold onto your sanity Antron
my threat even said his day hmm
I'm damaged I need help I know it but um
I just try to keep myself busy it's the
system broke a lot of things in me that
can't be fixed for the for their lives
are altered the locals turned the other
way their love life's are ruined and
when it comes to looking for work once
you've been this man they've got you
and they keep and then there's the
impact to their families atone yes yeah
too much trouble in the corner go to the
park I sent out to that night so I feel
good Michael Kay Williams portrays an
trans father and out of all the roles
that I've seen this man in where he
always gets typecast as a tough guy
because of his scar
Ava focuses on it not as an attribute
for evil but of a father's story who
survived but still got to grow up with a
reminder on his face while his son
didn't get to grow up at all I'm a
victim of wildin these scars of my face
I got jumped I got jumped by a pack of
of other young boys you know and I
almost lost my life I know it wow then
it looks like and I know what it feels
like I know that trauma
avis 13th which is available on YouTube
for free right right here covers this
vicious cycle even deeper on how prisons
profit by creating legal slaves we knew
we couldn't make it illegal to be either
against the war or black but by getting
the public to associate the hippies with
marijuana and blacks with heroin and
then criminalizing both heavily we could
disrupt those communities pretty much
jail is hiring but they make all the
money it's like a sweatshop of Americans
that a bunch of corporations and
companies profit from like the Karan's
would say Google it all the way down to
the Idaho potatoes through plea bargains
to criminalization of immigration and
now they're even going as far as GPS
tracking because if the prisons are
getting too full then they're trying to
figure out a way to move the
prisons outside the difference now where
somebody can hold up one of these get
what's going on they can put it on
YouTube and the whole world has to deal
with it that's what's new is not the
protest it's not the brutality it's the
fact that we can force a conversation
about it
speaking of Central Park 2020 there's
now an Amy Cooper law in the works
that's meant to counteract false
accusations from people who feel they're
wrapped in some authority that makes
them superior to others even weaponizing
their differences it's the blessing of
slavery that it actually built up the
framework for the world that white
people live in if the phrase is the trip
up let's get over the phrase and let's
get down to the heart sure let's get
down to what then do you want to call it
and I think may be a great thing for me
is to call it white blessing it's crazy
to think how deep the legacy of Central
Park goes especially at its roots with
Seneca Village a settlement run by
minorities that was destroyed because
the rich folk wanted a park that's only
the tip of what's being uncovered
meanwhile the toll weighs on those who
can't make enough to survive because the
system are rejected by their families
and eventually end up rejecting
themselves what did I learn about the
justice system is that it's the wrong
name for it
[Music]
[Applause]
korie's episode is deserving of way more
than an emmy remember this is the guy
who wasn't even supposed to be there
that went to support his friend you're
16 Cory wise at the moment that he
stepped foot off of that Street in
Harlem never came back for another 13
and a half years there was no bail he
never got bailed out he never saw the
light of day again
he went directly into Rikers at 16 years
old okay so he had a different
experience when I first sat with him he
said Ava you could tell my story but you
need to know right now I feel that it's
four plus one because at least they were
together and I was alone because his
parent wasn't there because he was 16
because they knew of his hearing problem
they made him sign things he couldn't
read and then gave him the maximum they
had coordinated beatings at each
facility that he was shipped to he
hasn't been solitary confinement because
an entire group was looking to kill him
he risked losing his mind instead of
losing his life and was labeled a
monster when all he wanted to do that
night was be with his girl while in
solitude he wrestles with his mind and
there's even a flashback of his sister
who gets kicked out of her house because
the mom saw her as a disease so real and
years later into his sentence
he's notified that she died an Ava
directs it so he sees her one last time
Wally's mourning but his final vision of
her doesn't look like the person you
last saw but the person she wanted to
become
ma'am you've made a masterpiece it's
crazy to think that without Cory in jail
he would have never interacted with a
guy who actually did it yet it still
wasn't until years later when that guy
finally admits to it because he had
found religion that he was finally
seeking Redemption and even after
confessing after connecting his DNA to
the only sock they'd ever had to a
confession that actually makes sense
because you know wasn't the five they
still go and a guided confessed he's the
sixth guy okay we missed a guy okay
the [ __ ] the delusion Linda finds time
in her busy schedule of you get this
coming up with fake ideas for her crime
books which of course she would have a
lot of them to meet up with Nancy the
assistant DA from back in the day who
calls her out on the carpet line she's
living while you were writing crime
novels Kevin Antron Yusef
Raymond and Cory we're serving time for
crimes they didn't commit and I'll be
damned if I'm gonna lose a wink of sleep
over it I mean with all those days off
for sure but here's a sick party you
didn't just put them in jail you changed
the way they're supposed to live their
lives
you told them they have to check a box
every time they applied for a job they'd
get denied a stripped them of their
rights including to vote you told him
they were worthless you told him there
was a crime that was committed and then
forced him into believing they did it
and brought up the death penalty and
y'all are telling me there's no legal
repercussions for getting that wrong
it's Police Department investigating
itself but I think that it would be a
tragedy if this story and the telling of
it came down to one woman being punished
for what she did because it's not about
her in 2002 they were finally exonerated
and a settlement was meant to be given
to them that didn't happen until 2014
listen I don't know lawsuit but they've
never apologized for the men or their
families for not what happened but what
was done so let me get this straight
y'all already wasted a decade plus of
these gentleman's lives and then he
deferred longer than a college student I
found out that the reason they dragged
it out was because the city knew it
would have to pay them so they just
delayed going to court you are trash
your whole department is trash they're
literally
had to be a new mayor in order for this
to get settled I'm telling you right now
forty-one million dollar split five ways
if that was my kid I know it's easy to
say it but if that was my kid hell no
people forgot that we had to split it
five ways we have to pay attorney fees
yeah right and and so now when you came
they go oh you got 40 million dollars
yeah me by myself yeah right and so I
made it worse than some instances at
this point if if you don't see the
importance of these go fund means and
how much technology has really helped
I'm let me explain but I I I can't help
you
they took diamonds and threw it in the
dirt and we were still diamonds and when
they picked us up we were still diamonds
still unbreakable still strong and I
think that for young people for the
future generations that are going to
absolutely change the system that's what
gives me hope
Ava then wraps the story of beautifully
closing out the credits with the young
black actors who played them with a
superimposed summary of where they went
but letting the actors names take a
backseat for us to take a glance at the
real men who went through this man who
left New York as soon as they could
others who remember their hometown and
brought a peace with them others who
stayed busy after and rightfully so
others who finally got moments that were
stripped from them all who are making
sure this never happens again this is
the story of Kevin Richardson
Antron McCray use of Salaam Raymond
Santana in Korey wise and we see them
[Music]
you
but James seven eight one four one zero
one seven he said he's never gone
through it so I mean like if he hasn't
gone through it then it probably doesn't